# What is Artificial Intelligence?

## Learning Goals

- Define Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), and Natural
  Language Processing (NLP).
- Describe the relationship between AI, ML, and NLP.
- Give a brief overview of the general ML approach.

## Introduction

We have been writing programs that tell the computer exactly how to perform a
task. They can programmed to store, process, transfer large volumes of data.
This has allowed us to develop incredible systems such as online banking
transactions, communication services, knowledge databases that serve billions of
people around the world.

However, computers have not historically been good at performing certain tasks
that humans are good at. For example, when we can identify handwritten numbers
almost instantly. Our ability to contextualize information based on our past
experiences and identify patterns is unmatched by any other species or machines
in existence.

If computers could to make sense of the large amount of data they can store and
process, they would be able to perform certain tasks like humans.

## Artificial Intelligence

The term artificial intelligence refers to the broad concept of developing
systems that can mimic human behavior and capabilities. It encompasses a wide
range of techniques, applications, and technologies that allows machines to act
like humans.

AI research has been going on since the 1950s but advances in computational
power, data storage capabilities, data proliferation, and algorithms has enabled
us to create large scale models that can perform specific human tasks.

We will be using the term “Artificial Intelligence” or “AI” to refer to the
general idea of systems capable of simulating human. This term is not used to
imply any underlying implementation details of systems.

## Machine Learning

Machine learning or ML is a specific approach within the AI discipline. This
field is concerned with the development of models and algorithms that allows
computers to learn patterns and relationships from data. These models can then
be used to make predictions or decisions.

Once a model has been developed and trained on a data set, it can be used like a
“black box”, i.e., we can use the model for tasks without understanding exactly
how it works.

## Natural Language Processing

Humans excel at understanding language and all the nuances that come with it.
Our languages are immensely more complicated that programming languages. And
there are multiple layers of context and emotions mixed in.

Natural language processing or NLP is a specific application domain within the
AI field that focuses on processing and understanding human language using
various machine learning techniques. Some of these tasks include speech
recognition, text classification, and sentiment analysis.

## Machines Can’t Reason

When working with current ML models, it is important to understand that these
models don’t reason like humans. These systems are trained on large data sets to
perform specific tasks.

Humans primarily learn new information by remembering past experiences. If an
experience is rewarding for us, we tend to seek it out again and if something
puts us off, we tend to avoid it.

We can also be told certain information which we can then verify once we
experience them. For example, kids can be taught to recognize cats by showing
them cats or pictures of cats and identifying it as such. Eventually, a kid will
recognize different breeds as “cats” even though they weren’t explicitly shown
every breed of cat in existence.

In machine learning, these two ideas are used to train computers to recognize
patterns in data. Computers are provided with large data sets, instructed on
which data features it should consider, and asked to make predictions or
decisions. The model is then provided feedback on its output which allows it to
tune its process and generate better output.

We can think of the model as a function that takes data and context as
parameters and generates the desired output.

The details of how these models are created are fascinating but not necessary to
for using AI based tools or incorporating them in applications.

If you’re curious to learn a bit more detail about these, check out the first
two videos in this
[playlist by 3Blue1Brown](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLZHQObOWTQDNU6R1_67000Dx_ZCJB-3pi).
These talk about “deep learning” which is a subset of machine learning that uses
artificial neural networks inspired by the structure and processes of the human
brain.

## Conclusion

In this lesson, we have clarified some of the most common terms you’re likely to
encounter when working with AI based tools. We also learned the general
principles behind ML models.

## Resources

- [Artificial Intelligence on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_intelligence).
- [Neural Networks Playlist](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLZHQObOWTQDNU6R1_67000Dx_ZCJB-3pi)
  by 3Blue1Brown.
